Add circuit extraction documentation (#812)
awslabs/palace: docs/src/features/circuit_extraction.md

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
--->
```

# Circuit Synthesis from AC Simulations

In this tutorial we discuss *Palace*'s circuit synthesis feature, which extracts a lumped-circuit
model of a device directly from the full-wave FEM. The synthesis feature is based on the rational
interpolation of the adaptive driven solver, which is discussed in [Adaptive Frequency Sweeps for
Driven Simulations](adaptive_driven_solver.md). We assume familiarity with the details therein.
We will continue to use the transmon model as our reference example, which features in the
[eigenmode](../examples/transmon.md) and [driven](adaptive_driven_solver.md) tutorials.

!!! warning "Warning: More Algorithmic Details Ahead!"

    The synthesis feature prints out circuit matrices, whose detailed form depends on "internal" algorithmic choices of the [adaptive driven solver](adaptive_driven_solver.md) and on *Palace*'s conventions.

    The internal algorithmic choices may change if better numerical algorithms become available. Furthermore, the interpretation of the output results requires some care to get right. Please proceed with caution.

!!! note

>     The data can be generated with the script `examples/transmon/transmon_tutorial_circuit.jl` and the result plots generated with `examples/transmon/transmon_tutorial_circuit_plots.py`.

Reviewer: These generator paths do not exist in this PR, and the stated `.py` plotter is inconsistent with the Julia workflow used by the related tutorial. The response branch adds one Julia data generator and one deliberately simple CSV-in/SVG-out Julia plotter, so this note can point to real files:

```suggestion
    Generate the tutorial data with `examples/transmon/transmon_tutorial_circuit.jl` and the
    figures with `examples/transmon/transmon_tutorial_circuit_plots.jl`.
```

!!! note "Naming Convention"

    There are a few cases where variables can cause naming confusion. *Palace* uses the notation ``\bm{A}(\omega) = \bm{K} + i\omega \bm{C} - \omega^2 \bm{M}`` for the matrix at a given ``\omega``. Here ``\bm{C}`` is the loss matrix in the finite element space, which is not the same as the capacitance matrix. The ``R`` matrix of ``QR`` orthogonalization is not the circuit resistance matrix.

>     For this tutorial we will consistently label circuit matrices with a hat: the inverse inductance ``\widehat{\bm{L}}^{-1}``, inverse resistance ``\widehat{\bm{R}}^{-1}``, capacitance ``\widehat{\bm{C}}``, etc. Similarly, we will label the voltage vector ``\widehat{\bm{V}}`` and current ``\widehat{\bm{I}}``. When referring to to scalar quantities, like voltage $V$, we will drop the hat when there is no risk of confusion.

Reviewer: Minor/recurring: this is the first of several grammar and capitalization issues. This suggestion preserves the author's dollar-delimited math and uses the same portable `$...$` convention for the neighboring math spans on the touched line. I marked only this representative occurrence; the complete copy-edit is in the [response-branch comparison](https://github.com/awslabs/palace/compare/simlapointe/prom_docs...hughcars/circuit-extraction-doc-fixes).

```suggestion
    For this tutorial we will consistently label circuit matrices with a hat: the inverse inductance $\widehat{\bm{L}}^{-1}$, inverse resistance $\widehat{\bm{R}}^{-1}$, capacitance $\widehat{\bm{C}}$, etc. Similarly, we will label the voltage vector $\widehat{\bm{V}}$ and current $\widehat{\bm{I}}$. When referring to scalar quantities, like voltage $V$, we will drop the hat when there is no risk of confusion.
```

    ``\mathrm{Im}~\widehat{\bm{C}}``. These terms may seem unfamiliar, since in "textbook" circuits
    ``\widehat{\bm{L}}``, ``\widehat{\bm{R}}``, ``\widehat{\bm{C}}`` are real.
  - `rom-orthogonalization-matrix-R.csv`. The Gram–Schmidt ``R`` factor of the synthesized circuit
    modes. This is very useful in advanced circuit postprocessing, but can be ignored by most users.
  - (When ports are frequency dependent): `rom-port-reference.csv`. The matched reference admittance
    ``Y_{\mathrm{ref}}`` and impedance ``Z_{\mathrm{ref}} = Y_{\mathrm{ref}}^{-1}`` tabulated against
    frequency for every included port. The header is `f (GHz)` followed, for each port label, by
    `Re{Y_ref[label]} (S)`, `Im{Y_ref[label]} (S)`, `Re{Z_ref[label]} (Ohm)`, and
    `Im{Z_ref[label]} (Ohm)`. The labels are `port_<idx>_re` for lumped ports and `waveport_<idx>_re`
    for wave ports. For a lumped port ``Y_{\mathrm{ref}} = 1/Z(\omega)`` is the port's circuit
    admittance; for a wave port it is derived from the fitted propagation constant ``k_n(\omega)`` and
    is therefore genuinely frequency dependent. This table is used to re-reference the synthesized

>     port admittances to a physical characteristic impedance when computing scattering parameters.

Reviewer: PR #841 changed the reference used for purely reactive lumped-port drives after this page was written.

```suggestion
  - `rom-port-reference.csv`. The matched reference admittance $Y_{\mathrm{ref}}$ and impedance
    $Z_{\mathrm{ref}} = Y_{\mathrm{ref}}^{-1}$ for every included port. It is written whenever at
    least one port is included. For a lumped port, $Y_{\mathrm{ref}} = 1/R_{\mathrm{ref}}$, where
    $R_{\mathrm{ref}}$ is the configured `R` when it is non-zero and $Z_0$ otherwise. The full RLC
    load remains in the synthesized matrices and `rom-portload-*` files. For a wave port,
    $Y_{\mathrm{ref}}$ comes from the fitted propagation constant $k_n(\omega)$ and may vary with
    frequency. The columns give frequency followed by the real and imaginary parts of
    $Y_{\mathrm{ref}}$ and $Z_{\mathrm{ref}}$ for each circuit port label.
```

    that that lumped ports cannot share parallel edges, since the degree of freedom on the edge
    contributes to both ports.
  - A port can be removed from the synthesized circuit matrices with the per-port
    `"IncludeInSynthesis"` flag (default `true`), available on both `LumpedPort` and `WavePort`.
    Setting it to `false` keeps the boundary condition physically enforced but omits that port's row
    and column from the synthesized matrices — useful for passive terminations you do not need to
    measure or cascade. Excited ports must keep `"IncludeInSynthesis": true`; *Palace* reports an
    error otherwise, because the excitation vector is always added to the synthesis basis.
  - The
    [`"AdaptiveCircuitSynthesisDomainOrthogonalization"`](../config/reference.md#config-solver-driven)
    option controls how the non-port basis vectors are orthogonalized and therefore determines the
    voltage normalization of synthesized nodes. In general, a user should not need to switch from
    the default value of `"Energy"`.
  - `"AdaptiveCircuitSynthesis": true` requires `"AdaptiveTol" > 0`; *Palace* reports an error

>     otherwise.

Reviewer: This should include the port precondition and the unsupported Floquet case so users can reject invalid configurations before running them.

```suggestion
  - `"AdaptiveCircuitSynthesis": true` requires `"AdaptiveTol" > 0` and at least one `LumpedPort`
    or `WavePort`; *Palace* reports an error otherwise.
  - `FloquetPort` boundaries are not yet supported with circuit synthesis. Their frequency-dependent
    Robin contribution is included in the adaptive sweep but not in the synthesized circuit pencil.
```

ports come first, followed by wave ports. Each wave-port mode ``\bm{w}_p`` is seeded from the
cross-section eigenproblem at a reference frequency — the centre of the sweep band — and, because it
is generally complex, contributes up to two real basis vectors (its real and imaginary parts, each
kept only if it survives the orthogonalization tolerance). The power-orthogonalization described
below extends to the wave-port boundaries, with the differences discussed in the [Wave port
boundary](#Wave-port-boundary) subsection. Because we add ports first and demand that the
lumped ports do not overlap, the orthogonalization does does not alter the port structure. We can
sensibly interpret the top left ``N_p \times N_p`` block of the synthesized matrices as the physical
port block. Driving the circuit with an external excitation at a port thus corresponds to exciting
the appropriate row ``j``. The adaptive solver appends HDM samples one frequency at a time until the
ROM meets the prescribed `"AdaptiveTol"`. The orthogonalization routine will now change these
vectors and, most notably, always remove the port mode contribution since these appear earlier in

> the basis.

Reviewer: A complex wave port can use two real basis vectors, so $N_p$ should count port basis vectors rather than physical ports.

```suggestion
The circuit-synthesis ROM adds the port modes as the first $N_p$ columns of the basis matrix
$\bm{Q}$. Here $N_p$ counts real port basis vectors, not physical ports: each included lumped port
contributes one, while each included wave port contributes one or two. Before orthogonalization, the
vectors added to the ROM basis look like:

$$
\bm{W} = \big[
\underbrace{\bm{e}_1 \;\; \cdots \;\; \bm{e}_{N_l}}_{\text{lumped ports}} \;\;
\underbrace{\mathrm{Re}\,\bm{w}_1 \;\; \mathrm{Im}\,\bm{w}_1 \;\; \cdots}_{\text{wave ports}} \;\;
\underbrace{\mathrm{Re}\,\bm{x}(\omega^*_1) \;\; \mathrm{Im}\,\bm{x}(\omega^*_1) \;\; \cdots}_{\text{synthesized interior nodes}}\big].
$$

Here $\bm{e}_j$ are the lumped port mode fields, $\bm{w}_p$ are the wave-port modal fields, and
$\bm{x}(\omega^*_k)$ are high-dimensional model (HDM) solutions at the sample frequencies. Lumped
ports come first, followed by wave ports. Each wave-port mode $\bm{w}_p$ is evaluated at the center
of the sweep band and can contribute both a real and an imaginary basis vector. The
power-orthogonalization described below extends to the wave-port boundaries. Because the ports are
added first, the top-left $N_p \times N_p$ block is the port block. For a complex wave port, the
`_re` and `_im` rows are two coordinates of the same physical terminal. The adaptive solver then
appends HDM samples and orthogonalizes them against these port modes.
```

port block recovers our expected circuit formulae, we have to proceed a little carefully, in
defining how to orthogonalize these fields.

#### Lumped port boundary

*Palace*'s implementation of lumped ports, voltage convention choices, and definition of the
scattering matrix are all defined in the [Reference Documentation](../reference.md). We assume
familiarity with that section. Here will also assume that ports are made of a single element ``e``,
although all formulae generalize.

On the lumped port ``\Gamma_j``, the correct orthogonalization of an electric field ``E_1``  against
the port ``\bm{e}_j`` is via the inner product defined by the power flow:

```math
\langle \bm{E}_1, \bm{e}_j \rangle_{\Gamma_j} = \int_{\Gamma_j} dS \, \bm{n} \cdot (\bm{E}_1 \times \frac{[\bm{e}_j]^*}{Z_s})
```

This is the time-averaged power flowing across the port (a Poynting flux), and using it as the
inner product is what makes the orthogonalization consistent with Lorentz reciprocity. Intuitively,
it means that each boundary mode ``\bm{e}_j`` carries power independently of the others — the port
modes are *power-orthogonal* — which is essential to recover the correct port excitation and

> scattering behaviour. Setting ``\bm{E}_1 = \bm{e}_j`` then fixes the normalization of the port mode:

Reviewer: The implementation uses a weighted electric-field overlap here, not the displayed cross product with the physical port impedance.

```suggestion
On a lumped port $\Gamma_j$, *Palace* uses the weighted overlap

$$
\langle \bm{E}_1, \bm{e}_j \rangle_{\Gamma_j}
  = \sum_e \frac{L_e}{N_j W_e}
    \int_{\Gamma_{j,e}} dS\, \bm{E}_1 \cdot \bm{e}_j^* .
$$

Here $N_j$ is the number of parallel elements in the port. This frequency-independent reference
weighting enforces power orthogonality; the physical termination $Z_s(\omega)$ is not used here.
Setting $\bm{E}_1 = \bm{e}_j$ fixes the port-mode normalization:
```

```math
\langle \bm{E}_1, \bm{E}_2 \rangle_\Omega = \int_\Omega dV \bm{E}_1 \varepsilon \bm{E}_2,
```

which is the electric domain energy, up to a factor 2. An appealing aspect of this inner product is
that it corresponds to a sensible physical quantity and converges to stable values with changing
finite element order or mesh refinement. We refer to this orthogonalization rule as `"Energy"`.

*Palace* allows the user to change the orthogonalization rule with the flag
[`"AdaptiveCircuitSynthesisDomainOrthogonalization"`](../config/reference.md#config-solver-driven),
although most users should not need this.

### Synthesizing Frequency-Dependent Boundary Conditions

The discussion so far assumed a purely quadratic ``\bm{A}(\omega) = \bm{K} + i\omega\bm{C} - \omega^2\bm{M}``. Several boundary conditions break this assumption: they add a term ``f(\omega)\, \bm{M}_b`` to the system matrix, where ``\bm{M}_b`` is an ``\omega``-independent boundary-mass
operator and ``f(\omega)`` is a scalar *dispersion* that may not be quadratic in ``\omega``. The
dispersion differs per boundary type:

  - **Wave port.** The boundary term is ``i\,k_n(\omega)\,\bm{M}_b``, where ``k_n(\omega)`` is the

>     modal propagation constant; the port admittance is ``Y_p(\omega) = k_n(\omega) / (i\omega\mu)``.

Reviewer: The leading `i` belongs to the Robin operator, not the modal admittance.

```suggestion
    modal propagation constant; the port admittance is $Y_p(\omega) = k_n(\omega) / (\omega\mu)$.
```

    leading ``i`` is carried by the (purely imaginary) projected boundary mass, so the scalar that is
    actually fit is ``f(\omega) = \omega / Z(\omega)``, in general complex.

For each such boundary, *Palace* fits ``f(\omega)`` on the sweep band and chooses one of two regimes
automatically, by comparing the residual of an order-2 polynomial fit against `"AdaptiveTol"`:

**Polynomial regime.** When a quadratic ``f(\omega) \approx \alpha_0 + \alpha_1\omega + \alpha_2\omega^2`` already meets the tolerance, the fit is folded directly into the synthesized
matrices and *no rows or columns are added*. With the projected boundary mass ``\bm{M}_b^r`` carried
in the imaginary slot (``\bm{M}_b^r = i\,\bm{M}_{\mathrm{proj}}``), the three coefficients map as

```math
\alpha_0 \;\to\; \mathrm{Im}~\widehat{\bm{L}}^{-1}, \qquad
-\alpha_1 \;\to\; \mathrm{Re}~\widehat{\bm{R}}^{-1}, \qquad
-\alpha_2 \;\to\; \mathrm{Im}~\widehat{\bm{C}} .
```

This is why a wave port or surface-conductivity boundary can populate ``\widehat{\bm{R}}^{-1}`` (via
``\alpha_1``) and the imaginary matrices (via ``\alpha_0`` and ``\alpha_2``) even when there is no

> material loss tangent.

Reviewer: The sign shown for $\alpha_1$ should be positive. The component mapping also needs to be limited to real coefficients because surface-conductivity fits can be complex.

```suggestion
For wave ports and surface conductivity, *Palace* fits $f(\omega)$ on the sweep band and compares a
quadratic fit against `"AdaptiveTol"`:

**Polynomial regime.** If $f(\omega) \approx \alpha_0 + \alpha_1\omega + \alpha_2\omega^2$ meets the
tolerance, no rows or columns are added. With $\bm{M}_b^r = i\,\bm{M}_{\mathrm{proj}}$, real
coefficients, as in the wave-port fit, map as

$$
\alpha_0 \;\to\; \mathrm{Im}~\widehat{\bm{L}}^{-1}, \qquad
\alpha_1 \;\to\; \mathrm{Re}~\widehat{\bm{R}}^{-1}, \qquad
-\alpha_2 \;\to\; \mathrm{Im}~\widehat{\bm{C}} .
$$

Surface-conductivity fits can have complex coefficients. In that case, their real and imaginary
parts contribute to both components of the corresponding circuit matrices.
```

**Augmented regime.** When the quadratic residual exceeds `"AdaptiveTol"`, *Palace* fits the leftover
residual with an AAA rational approximation [8],

```math
f(\omega) - \big(\alpha_0 + \alpha_1\omega + \alpha_2\omega^2\big) \;\approx\;
d + \sum_{k} \frac{r_k}{\omega - p_k} ,
```

with poles ``p_k`` and residues ``r_k``. The constant ``d`` is folded back into ``\alpha_0``, and
each pole becomes a small set of *auxiliary states* appended to the synthesized matrices. Writing the
projected boundary-mass coupling as a rank factorization ``r_k\,\bm{M}_{\mathrm{proj}} = \sum_j \sigma_{k,j}\, \bm{u}_{k,j}\bm{u}_{k,j}^{*}`` (a truncated SVD, keeping the directions ``j`` with
significant singular value ``\sigma_{k,j}``), each kept direction ``(k,j)`` adds one auxiliary node.

> For that node the augmented pencil is populated as

Reviewer: Factor the projected boundary mass independently of the generally complex residue, and use transpose rather than conjugate transpose to preserve the complex-symmetric realization.

```suggestion
projected boundary mass as a rank factorization $\bm{M}_{\mathrm{proj}} = \sum_j \sigma_{j}\, \bm{u}_{j}\bm{u}_{j}^{\top}$ (a truncated SVD, keeping the directions $j$ with
significant singular value $\sigma_{j}$), each pair of pole $k$ and kept direction $j$ adds one
auxiliary node. For that node the augmented pencil is populated as
```

```math
\widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{aux}} = -p_k, \qquad
\widehat{\bm{C}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{aux}} = -i, \qquad
\widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{node},\mathrm{aux}} =
  \widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{node}}^{\top} =

>   \sqrt{-i\,\sigma_{k,j}}\;\bm{u}_{k,j} ,

Reviewer: The coupling must include the residue and the singular value from the boundary-mass factorization.

```suggestion
  \sqrt{-i\,r_k\,\sigma_{j}}\;\bm{u}_{j} ,
```

```

so that the auxiliary block contributes ``\widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{node},\mathrm{aux}} \big(\widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{aux}} + i\omega\, \widehat{\bm{C}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{aux}}\big)^{-1} \widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{node}} = \dfrac{\sigma_{k,j}\, \bm{u}_{k,j}\bm{u}_{k,j}^{*}}{\,\omega - p_k\,}``. Eliminating the auxiliary states by Schur

> complement therefore recovers the rational term ``r_k/(\omega - p_k)\,\bm{M}_{\mathrm{proj}}``

Reviewer: The Schur complement contributes with a leading minus; spelling it out also makes the complex-symmetric, rather than Hermitian, construction explicit.

```suggestion
where both couplings are the same unconjugated vector, so the augmented pencil stays
complex-symmetric rather than Hermitian. Eliminating the auxiliary node by Schur complement
contributes $-\widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{node},\mathrm{aux}} \big(\widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{aux}} + i\omega\, \widehat{\bm{C}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{aux}}\big)^{-1} \widehat{\bm{K}}_{\mathrm{aux},\mathrm{node}} = i\,\dfrac{r_k\,\sigma_{j}\, \bm{u}_{j}\bm{u}_{j}^{\top}}{\,\omega - p_k\,}$ to the node block, and summing over the kept
directions $j$ recovers the rational term $i\,r_k/(\omega - p_k)\,\bm{M}_{\mathrm{proj}} = r_k/(\omega - p_k)\,\bm{M}_b^r$
exactly.
```

        "Permeability": [ 0.99999975,      0.99999975,       0.99999979      ],
        "MaterialAxes": [ [0.8, 0.6, 0.0], [-0.6, 0.8, 0.0], [0.0, 0.0, 1.0] ]
      }
    ]
  },
  "Solver"    : {
    "Driven": {
      "Samples"    : [ {"Type": "Linear", "MinFreq": 3.5, "MaxFreq": 6.5, "FreqStep": 0.025} ],
      "AdaptiveTol": 1e-1,
      "AdaptiveCircuitSynthesis": true
    },
    "Order" : 2,
    "Linear": {"Type": "Default", "Tol": 1.0e-12, "MaxIts": 1000}
  }
}
```

In addition to the standard output (`port-S.csv`, `domain-E.csv`, etc.), *Palace* writes the circuit
files listed in the quick-start section, above.

Let us look at the difference in the standard output `domain-E.csv` between the simulations with
`"AdaptiveCircuitSynthesis": true` and `"AdaptiveCircuitSynthesis": false`.

```@raw html
<br/><p align="center">
  <img src="../../assets/examples/circuit_transmon_domain_e_comparison.svg" width="100%" />
</p><br/>
```

The left column above shows the domain electric energy ``E_\mathrm{elec}`` from the uniform driven
solver, which we use as our reference baseline. This is exactly the same data shown previously in

> the [driven solver tutorial](adaptive_driven_solver.md#transmon-example). The

Reviewer: Minor/recurring: these generated Documenter fragments are case-sensitive. I marked only the first broken occurrence; the response branch fixes this repeat and the final theory-reference fragment as well.

```suggestion
the [driven solver tutorial](adaptive_driven_solver.md#Transmon-example). The
```

know that linear solves will have a worse conditioning close to the poles and errors will spike. We
can estimate this error with matrix stability analysis [6], but that is beyond the scope of this
tutorial. Furthermore, the different orthogonalization routine used with synthesis adds many more
floating-point operations when calculating the basis ``\bm{Q}``. However, we expect the additional
error from these operations to be mostly frequency-independent and contribute to the
noise floor on the plots above.

For completeness, we show the analogous plot for the scattering parameters from `port-S.csv`. This
plot has a similar interpretation to the `domain-E.csv` plot above.

```@raw html
<br/><p align="center">
  <img src="../../assets/examples/circuit_transmon_port_s_comparison.svg" width="100%" />
</p><br/>
```

Let us now look at the `rom-*.csv` output. For this model, there are `5` output matrices of size
``19 \times 19``: `rom-Linv-re.csv`, `rom-Rinv-re.csv`, `rom-C-re.csv`, `rom-C-im.csv`, and
`rom-orthogonalization-matrix-R.csv`. The header of the `csv` files describes the origin of the

> nodes as described above (shortened for brevity):

Reviewer: This currently reads as a complete output inventory, but it omits the port-reference table, per-port load matrices, and conditional eigenvalue/eigenvector files.

```suggestion
Let us now look at the `rom-*.csv` output. For this model, five matrix files describe the
$19 \times 19$ synthesized circuit pencil and its orthogonalization:
`rom-Linv-re.csv`, `rom-Rinv-re.csv`, `rom-C-re.csv`, `rom-C-im.csv`, and
`rom-orthogonalization-matrix-R.csv`. *Palace* also writes the port-reference table, the non-zero
per-port load matrices, and, when estimates are found, the synthesized-system eigenvalue and
eigenvector files described above. The headers of the circuit matrix files describe the origin of
the nodes (shortened for brevity):
```
